---
layout: post
title: winapi 0.3
---

For over a year people have been wondering when the next version of winapi would be published, and today I am happy to announce that `winapi` 0.3 has finally been published to crates.io! This new version has a lot of changes, so this post will go over them and cover any changes that will need to be made to your own code when migrating to this new version.

## The `-sys` crates are dead. Long live the `winapi` behemoth.

In previous versions of `winapi`, function bindings were separated into their own independent crates based on which import library contained those symbols. For example, the `MessageBoxW` function is exported from `user32.lib`, and was thus bound in the `user32-sys` crate.

In 0.3, this is no longer true: the `winapi` crate contains all types, constants, macros, *and* functions. As such, dependencies on all `-sys` crates in the winapi family should be removed, and all imports updated to point towards `winapi` itself.

All of the `-sys` crates on `crates.io` are now deprecated and may eventually be yanked in the future to prevent new projects from accidentally using them. If you still have a project using these, it will continue to work, but it's highly recommended you migrate to `winapi` 0.3 when possible to take advantage of the various improvements and gain access to new bindings.

## Items are now organised into modules.

Definitions in `winapi` were previously not organised into modules. This allowed you to use a type, or constant without having to consider where it was defined. If C code or documentation mentioned `HWND`, then it was available as `winapi::HWND`, irrespective of the C header required.

In 0.3, all items are organised into modules based on the Windows SDK header file that defines them. \[[†](#fn†)] If you are familiar with the file structure of the Windows SDK headers, `winapi` now directly mirrors that. For example, `HWND` is now located at `shared::windef::HWND`. To continue the previous example, `MessageBoxW`, which is defined by `winuser.h`, can now be found in the `um::winuser` module.

You can determine where an item (or the module that corresponds to a particular header) is located by searching the [online `winapi` 0.3 documentation]. Most translated headers will be in the `um` (user-mode) top-level module, items shared between user- and kernel-mode code in the `shared` module, Visual C++-specific items in the `vc` module, and WinRT-related items in the `winrt` module.

If given a choice between using names from both `shared` and `um` (as the latter re-exports items from the former), and you are not writing code intended to run in the kernel (*i.e.* device drivers), stick to `um`. There is no difference between the two, but using the `um` modules better matches the conventions of writing user-mode code.

[online `winapi` 0.3 documentation]: https://docs.rs/winapi/0.3/x86_64-pc-windows-msvc/winapi/

## Modules gated on feature flags

All binding modules are gated behind Cargo feature flags. This means that in order to access the contents of a module, you must first enable the corresponding feature flag on the `winapi` crate. For example, to use `MessageBoxW` in the `um::winuser` module, you must enable the `winuser` feature.

Note that enabling a module *also* enables any modules it depends on for types. For example, `MessageBoxW`'s definition requires `HWND`. As a result, enabling the `winuser` feature *also* enables (among others) the `windef` feature, so that `HWND` is defined.

Features also control which DLLs will be linked. Enabling a module will automatically link any libraries needed by functions defined in that module. For example, enabling `winuser` will automatically cause your program to be linked against `user32.lib`, resulting in a runtime dependency on `user32.dll`.

There is also an `everything` feature that enables all other feature gates. Enabling everything will adversely affect compile times. \[[‡](#fn‡)]

## Compile time improvements

One of the biggest complaints about 0.2 was compile times. Due to `winapi` being such a common dependency on Windows, users would often find their builds waiting on `winapi` before cargo could move on to compiling the rest of their project. Given that `winapi` is still tiny compared to the sheer amount of definitions in the Windows SDK, something had to be done to improve compile times.

Thanks to a lot of hard work optimizing the way symbols are defined, compile times have dropped significantly. Despite 0.3.0 having over twice as much code as 0.2.8, compile times have dropped from 23 seconds to 18 seconds with all features enabled.

However, if you only enable the features that you need, compile times drop to almost negligible levels. For example if you just enable the `winuser` feature, it will take less than 4 seconds to compile. Because modules are disabled by default, as new headers are added to `winapi` your compile time will remain constant!

## COM interfaces

All COM interfaces now implement the `Interface` trait, which will allow better `ComPtr` abstractions. Currently this trait exposes a single method which returns the IID of the interface, essential for `QueryInterface` wrappers. For example, to get the IID of the `IUnknown` interface, call `IUnknown::uuidof()`.

## Enumerations

Previously, each `enum` was translated to a "newtype" structure. For example, the definition of `POINTER_INPUT_TYPE` in `winapi` 0.2 was equivalent to:

```rust
pub struct POINTER_INPUT_TYPE(pub u32);
pub const PT_POINTER: POINTER_INPUT_TYPE = POINTER_INPUT_TYPE(0x00000001);
pub const PT_TOUCH: POINTER_INPUT_TYPE = POINTER_INPUT_TYPE(0x00000002);
pub const PT_PEN: POINTER_INPUT_TYPE = POINTER_INPUT_TYPE(0x00000003);
pub const PT_MOUSE: POINTER_INPUT_TYPE = POINTER_INPUT_TYPE(0x00000004);
pub const PT_TOUCHPAD: POINTER_INPUT_TYPE = POINTER_INPUT_TYPE(0x00000005);
```

For `winapi` 0.3, enumerations are instead type aliases to the underlying integer type. The primary reason for this is compile time improvements, due to less types and significantly less trait implementations being produced. The equivalent to the above in 0.3 is:

```rust
pub type POINTER_INPUT_TYPE = u32;
pub const PT_POINTER: POINTER_INPUT_TYPE = 0x00000001;
pub const PT_TOUCH: POINTER_INPUT_TYPE = 0x00000002;
pub const PT_PEN: POINTER_INPUT_TYPE = 0x00000003;
pub const PT_MOUSE: POINTER_INPUT_TYPE = 0x00000004;
pub const PT_TOUCHPAD: POINTER_INPUT_TYPE = 0x00000005;
```

## Standard library support and `c_void`.

`winapi` now defaults to *not* linking against the standard library. There is only one situation in which this will be a problem: when you wish to use `winapi` definitions with other code that uses the `c_void` type.

`winapi` defines a number of C-compatible types in the top-level `ctypes` module. All of these are aliases to the "real" type (*e.g.* `type c_char = i8;`). The exception is `c_void` which does not have a single, corresponding Rust type. As such, by default, `winapi` defines its own `c_void` type.

However, this `c_void` will not be compatible with `c_void` as used by any other code, unless that code is specifically using `winapi`'s type. This can be fixed by enabling the `std` feature, which causes `winapi::ctypes::c_void` to instead alias to `std::os::raw::c_void`.

## MinGW import libraries

One of the strange things about the `pc-windows-gnu` targets is the fact that it is a self contained toolchain capable of linking Rust projects without any external compilers installed. Unfortunately it only comes with a small selection of import libraries, which meant many system functions would not link by default.

The various `-sys` crates from the 0.2 era solved this by bundling import libraries from MinGW-w64, however this was a poor solution as those import libraries were woefully out of date, meaning you still could not use any functions introduced with newer versions of Windows. Furthermore, even if you only used the `pc-windows-msvc` targets, you would still waste a bit of bandwidth downloading these bundled import libraries.

In 0.3 all these import libraries were moved to dedicated import library crates, `winapi-x86_64-pc-windows-gnu` and `winapi-i686-pc-windows-gnu`, which `winapi` has target specific dependencies on in order to prevent cargo from downloading them on targets that don't need them. In addition, these import libraries are made by me and are up to date with the latest Windows SDK, allowing you to use the hottest new Windows 10 functionality.

## Migration example

To make it easier to understand how to migrate your code, here is a simple "Hello, world!" example.

In `winapi` 0.2 you would have something like the following:

```rust
//! Add the following to `Cargo.toml`:
//!
//! ```cargo
//! [dependencies]
//! winapi = "0.2"
//! user32-sys = "0.2"
//! ```

extern crate winapi;
extern crate user32;
use std::io::Error;

fn print_message(msg: &str) -> Result<i32, Error> {
    use std::ffi::OsStr;
    use std::iter::once;
    use std::os::windows::ffi::OsStrExt;
    use std::ptr::null_mut;
    use winapi::MB_OK;
    use user32::MessageBoxW;
    let wide: Vec<u16> = OsStr::new(msg).encode_wide().chain(once(0)).collect();
    let ret = unsafe {
        MessageBoxW(null_mut(), wide.as_ptr(), wide.as_ptr(), MB_OK)
    };
    if ret == 0 { Err(Error::last_os_error()) }
    else { Ok(ret) }
}

fn main() {
    print_message("Hello, world!").unwrap();
}
```

With `winapi` 0.3 your code would be changed to this:

```rust
//! Add the following to `Cargo.toml`:
//!
//! ```cargo
//! [dependencies.winapi]
//! version = "0.3"
//! features = ["winuser"] # enable the `um::winuser` module.
//!
//! # No dependency on `user32-sys`.
//! ```

extern crate winapi;
// No `extern crate user32;`.
use std::io::Error;

fn print_message(msg: &str) -> Result<i32, Error> {
    use std::ffi::OsStr;
    use std::iter::once;
    use std::os::windows::ffi::OsStrExt;
    use std::ptr::null_mut;
    // `MB_OK` and `MessageBoxW` are in a module.
    use winapi::um::winuser::{MB_OK, MessageBoxW};
    let wide: Vec<u16> = OsStr::new(msg).encode_wide().chain(once(0)).collect();
    let ret = unsafe {
        MessageBoxW(null_mut(), wide.as_ptr(), wide.as_ptr(), MB_OK)
    };
    if ret == 0 { Err(Error::last_os_error()) }
    else { Ok(ret) }
}

fn main() {
    print_message("Hello, world!").unwrap();
}
```

---

<a name="fn†"></a>
\[†]: This is due to the existence of duplicate, non-compatible definitions in the Windows SDK. The SDK gets around this via abuse of the C pre-processor to redefine names based on the order in which header files are included.

<a name="fn‡"></a>
\[‡]: You will not just have time to make a cup of coffee. You will have time to fly to the coffee belt, harvest the beans, fly back, roast them, grind them, and *then* make a cup of coffee.
