---
layout: post
title: What I want from Rust in 2019
published: false
---

With the new year, it is time to review the progress Rust has made and where Rust needs to go.

## Language constructs

For FFI, things are starting to look pretty good.
`#[repr(align(N))]` `#[repr(packed(N))]` and unions are all finally stable, allowing for significantly more API surface to be bound correctly.
However there are still plenty of things that would help out significantly:

* Const generics are absolutely vital and having them would make so many things easier to implement.
  Seriously, get it done already!
* Constant functions would eliminate some macro usage in `winapi` and make so many things much easier to write, especially in concert with const generics.
* Better support for unsized types and custom dynamically sized types.
  The world of FFI is full of variable sized structs and opaque types, but the language doesn't provide any way to enforce how such types should be used, or even help with dealing with them.
  We could do so much better, so please let's get some progress made here.
* There's a lot of papercuts with dealing with exporting and especially re-exporting symbols.
  Get some focus on improving this situation.

## Ergonomics

You've already done enough damage. Lay off the ergonomics and focus on more useful stuff please.

## Enterprise quality

This is Rust's real weak spot. In order for businesses to take Rust seriously, especially in the Windows world, there's a lot of things that have to be done:

* Manifest files are absolutely essential to support newer versions of Windows correctly.
  Without them Windows forces compatibility behavior on our applications and high DPI support becomes much harder.
  Get some first class support for manifest files already!
* Resource files are very important, as they provide embedded resources to be used by GDI applications.
  Even the simple act of having a custom icon on your binary requires a resource file.
* Why aren't the binaries for Rust signed yet?
  This looks incredibly bad and tarnishes Rust's image from the moment people try to install Rust.

## Cargo features

Please please please throw out the existing cargo feature system already and come up with something better.
It is massively deficient and causes so many problems.

* There's no notion of mutually exclusive features.
* There's no way to define features that are chosen by the top level crate rather than direct reverse dependencies.
* Excessive unioning of features across all possible configurations leads to difficulty with trying to write `no_std` applications.
* No way for a build script to programmatically choose whether a given dependency will be needed and avoid downloading and building it.
